---
title: Suspense
description: some description here
---

## Background

NOTE: In the latest version of React, "Concurrent Mode" is not a thing. Instead
there are "Concurrent Features" that your components opt-into via the concurrent
APIs which you will learn about in this workshop. Learn more about some of the
changes in the notice at the top of this docs page:
https://17.reactjs.org/docs/concurrent-mode-reference.html

In today's React ecosystem, there are three ways to load data into your app:

1. Render-Fetch Waterfalls (aka "fetch as you render"): This refers to fetching
   data inside of components, from the browser, after a JavaScript bundle has
   been loaded and rendered. We call it a "waterfall" because after a bundle
   loads, renders, and kicks off a data fetch, it renders child components that
   do the same. Load modules → render (spinner) → fetch → render children (more
   spinners) → fetch in children → etc. Each time you render and show a spinner
   is another step in the waterfall.

If you haven't already, take a scroll down our home page to see how this method
of loading data affects the UI. It creates artificial data and module
hierarchies by coupling those resources to UI hierarchy. You don't know what to
fetch until you render, and you can't render until you fetch the parent's data!
This tends to create "jank" in the UI and cause cumulative layout shift (CLS) as
child views pop into the page after parent views have already rendered.

2. Fetch, Then Render: Before rendering a page, fetch all of your data and then
   render the entire page at once. This is the default behavior in Remix. This
   is also how most websites have worked for decades. Because of nested routes,
   Remix knows all of the dependencies for a page (JS modules, data, even CSS)
   just from the URL so it can run all queries and load resources in parallel.
   It can even prefetch those resources when you think the user is going to
   visit a page. As you'll see in this post, this has a positive impact on the
   initial page load and subsequent navigation.

3. Render As You Fetch: Like fetch, then render, you kick off all loading in
   parallel but you don't wait for all of the resources. Instead, you render
   whichever pieces are ready when they're ready. This is not possible unless
   you're already able to fetch, then render. It's an optimization to get
   something useful (not an empty div please!) to the user ASAP.

Almost every app in the React ecosystem today uses render-fetch waterfalls. This
is the default behavior for any data fetching that runs inside a useEffect()
hook, including libraries like react-query, useSWR, Apollo Client, and many
others.

Out of the box, React Server Components are also a render-fetch waterfall.
Because fetching is done inside of components, your app doesn't know what to
fetch until a component renders.

The problem is that out of the three, the _render-fetch waterfall provides the
worst UX_. Let's run some tests to see why.

### Render as you fetch

The idea here is: get the data **as soon as you have the information you need**
for the data. This sounds obvious, but if you think about it, how often do you
have a component that requests data once it's been mounted. There's a few
milliseconds between the time you click "go" and the time that component is
mounted... Unless that component's code is **lazy-loaded**. In which case,
there's a lot more time involved (first load the code, then parse the code, then
run the code, then render the component, and finally make the request) and your
users are hanging around waiting while they could be making requests for the
data they need.

"Render as you fetch" is intended to fix this problem because you can make the
request for the code and the data at the same time.

### Suspense Image

Loading images is tricky business because you're handing the asynchronous state
over to the browser. It manages the loading, error, and success states for you.
But what if you have an experience that doesn't look any good until the image is
actually loaded? Or what if you want to render a fallback in the image's place
while it's loading (you want to provide your own loading UI)? In that case,
you're kinda out of luck, because the browser gives us no such API.
