---
title: Buffers in Node.js
---

### Background

Mechanism for reading or manipulating streams of binary data. The Buffer class I
was introduced as part of the Node.js API to make it possible to manipulate or
interact with streams of binary data.

But numbers are not the only data type we work with. We also have strings,
images, and even videos. Computers know how to represent all types of data in
binaries. Let’s take strings, for example. How will a computer represent the
string “L” in binaries? To store any character in binaries, Computers will first
convert that character to a number, then convert that number to its binary
representation. So for the string “L”, computers will first convert L to a
number that represents L. Let’s see how.

#### Character Sets

Character Sets are already defined rules of what exact number represents each
character. We have different definitions of these rules.The very popular ones
include Unicode and ASCII. JavaScript plays really well with Unicode Character
Sets. In fact, it is the Unicode in your browser that states that 76 should
represent L.

#### Character Encoding

Just as there are rules that define what number should represent a character,
there are also rules that define how that number should be represented in
binaries. Specifically, how many bits to use to represent the number. This is
called Character Encoding.

One of the definitions for Character Encoding is the UTF-8. UTF-8 states that
characters should be encoded in bytes. A byte is a set of eight bits — eight 1s
and 0s. So eight 1s and 0s should be used to represent the Code Point of any
character in binary.

To understand this, as we mentioned earlier, the binary representation of the
number 12 is 1100. So when UTF-8 state that 12 should be in eight bits, UTF-8 is
saying that a computer needs to add more bits to the left side of the actual
base-2 representation of the number 12 to make it a byte. So 12 should be stored
as 00001100. Makes sense?

Therefore, 76 should be stored as 01001100.

computers also have specified rules on how images and videos should be converted
or encoded and stored in binaries. The point here is, computers stores all data
types in binaries, and this is known as binary data.

But there is a minimum and a maximum amount of data a process could take over
time. So if the rate the data arrives is faster than the rate the process
consumes the data, the excess data need to wait somewhere for its turn to be
processed.

On the other hand, if the process is consuming the data faster than it arrives,
the few data that arrive earlier need to wait for a certain amount of data to
arrive before being sent out for processing.

That “waiting area” is the buffer! It is a small physical location in your
computer, usually in the RAM, where data are temporally gathered, wait, and are
eventually sent out for processing during streaming.

Node.js can’t control the speed or time of data arrival, the speed of the
stream. It only can decide when it’s time to send out the data. If it’s not yet
time, Node.js will put them in the buffer — the “waiting area” — a small
location in the RAM, until it’s time to send them out for processing.

Character encoding
https://www.w3.org/International/questions/qa-what-is-encoding
